Edited Proteolysis section (#19)
jessegmeyerlab/proteomics-tutorial: content/05.proteolysis.md

There are many choices of enzymes and chemicals that hydrolyze proteins into peptides. 
This section summarizes potential choices and their strengths and weaknesses. 

Trypsin is the most common choice of protease for proteome hydrolysis [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21376].

> Irrespective of the experimental strategies and methodologies used in proteomics, in-gel or in-solution bottom-up proteomics workflows uses enzymatic digestion for protein identification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: this is in the first paragraph already

> Depending on the amino-acid cleavage specificities, several enzymes are being used in shotgun proteomics approaches. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: redundant with first paragraph

> Nevertheless, trypsin remains the primary choice because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and is comparatively cheaper than other enzymes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trypsin is favorable because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and is comparatively cheaper than other enzymes. 
```

Trypsin cleaves at the C-terminus of basic amino acids, arginine and lysine. 

> Since the generated peptides are very short in length (3-35 amino acids), they can be subjected to chromatography separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and database-enabled identification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of the peptides generated from trypsin are short in length (less than ~ 20 amino acids), which is ideal for chromatographic separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and identification by database search.
```

> But the drawback is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are very small in length (≤ 6 amino acids) and hence it’s very difficult for MS based sequencing [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410; @PMID:30687733].
```

> This makes it more challenging to identify protein isoforms and other amino acid modifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This limits the number of identifiable protein isoforms and post translational modifications.
```

3. theoretical studies of proteolysis enzymes [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/960902]
4. Challenges associated with alternative enzyme choices (non-specific and semi-specific enzymes)
5. Alternative enzyme choices (one paragraph each?) - 
The enzyme choice mostly depends on the application.
In general, for a mere protein identification mostly trypsin is the choice due to the reasons aforementioned.

> However, alternative enzymes are used when the sequence information of a particular protein is limited in the database repositories. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure exactly what you are trying to say here - do you mean if you don't have genomic data you can use multiple proteases for **de novo** assembly? Can you please edit to clarify?

Author: Have restructured the sentence by incorporating necessary suggestions

> Especially, they serve as an advantage in improving the confidence of protein identification [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005].

Reviewer: These refs suggest that multiple proteases increase sequence coverage not identification confidence, is there evidence that they can improve confidence? please clarify or edit to say improving sequence coverage

Author: Has restructured the sentence by saying that using alternative enzymes improves sequence coverage information.

> In addition to that they also helps in improving the sensitivity and accuracy of protein identification in terms of the number of petides derived [@PMID:30336047].

Reviewer: this ref is not about identification its about quant accuracy - please edit

Author: Have modified the sentence.

Trypsin cleaves at the C-terminus of basic amino acids, arginine and lysine. 
Many of the peptides generated from trypsin are short in length (less than ~ 20 amino acids), which is ideal for chromatographic separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and identification by database search.
The main drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410; @PMID:30687733].
This limits the number of identifiable protein isoforms and post translational modifications.

3. theoretical studies of proteolysis enzymes [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/960902]
4. Challenges associated with alternative enzyme choices (non-specific and semi-specific enzymes)

Many alternative proteases are available with different specificities that complement trypsin to reveal different proteomic sequences [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005], which can help distinguish protein isoforms [@PMID:27123950].
The enzyme choice mostly depends on the application.
In general, for a mere protein identification mostly trypsin is the choice due to the reasons aforementioned.

> However, alternative enzymes are used for de novo assembly when the genomic data information is limited in the public database repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, alternative enzymes are used for de novo assembly when the genomic data information is limited in the public database repositories [@pmid:31615963; @pmid:30622160; @pmid:29990557; @doi:10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106324].
```

Use of multiple proteases for proteome digestion also can improve the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification [@PMID:30336047].

> Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease invloved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:6359954, @PMID:25823410].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease that cleaves at the carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:6359954, @PMID:25823410].
```

Like trypsin, the optimum pH required for its activity is from pH 7-9. 
One among the major advantage of Lys-C is that it is resistant to denaturing agents, including 8 M urea [@PMID: 27123950].
Compared to Arginine, trypsin is less efficient in cleaving Lysine, which could limit the quality of quantitation from tryptic peptides.

> Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in parallel to complement tryspin digestion [@PMID:23017020]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in combination with trypsin [@PMID:23017020]. 
```

> Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_ [@PMID: 4627743].

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_ [@PMID: 4627743].
```

This specifically cleaves at the C-terimus of Glu. 

> However, depending on the pH conditions, in addition to Glu (pH 4.0) it is invloved in cleaving Asp (pH 8.0) residues also [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652 ].

Reviewer: the citation you added argues the specificity is the same at ph 4.5 or pH 8, which seems like the opposite of this sentence that seems to argue a different preference at different pH

Author: have modified the sentence:
However, in addition to Glu (pH 4.0) it is invloved in cleaving Asp (pH 8.0) residues also [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652 ]

Peptidyl-Asp metallopeptidase, commonly known as Asp-N, is a metalloprotease obtained from _Pseudomonas fragi_ [@PMID:2669754].
It is involved in the hydrolysis of Asp residues at the N-terminal of the peptide and works at an optimum pH 4-9.  
As with any metalloprotease, chelators like EDTA should be avoided for digestion buffers when using Asp-N.
Studies also suggests that Asp-N cleaves at the amino terminus of Glu when a detergent is present in the proteolysis buffer [@PMID:2669754]. 

> However, it efficiently cleaves at the N termini of Asp than Glu yielding many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asp-N often leaves many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].
```

Also, the chymotryptic peptides generated after proteolysis will cover the proteome space orthogonal to that of tryptic peptides both in a quantitative and qualitative manner [@PMID:24290761; @PMID:22669647; @PMID:24696503]
Clostripain, commonly known as Arg-C, is a cysteine protease obtained from _Clostridium histolyticum_.
It hydrolyse mostly the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.
The peptides generated are generally longer than that of tryptic peptides.
Arg-C is often used with other proteases for improving qualitative proteome data and also for investigating PTMs [@PMID:25823410]. 
LysargiNase, also known as Ulilysin, is a recently discovered protease belonging to the metalloprotease family. 
It is a thermophilic protease derived from _Methanosarcina acetivorans_ that specifically cleaves at the N-terminus of Lys and Arg residues [@PMID:25419962].
Hence, it enabled discovery of C-terminal peptides that were not observed using trypsin.

> In addition, it also can cleave modified amino acids such as methylated or dimethylated arginine and lysine [@PMID:25419962].

Reviewer: please make sure there are empty lines in between each paragraph about each different protease

Author: sure, will do accordingly

There are many choices of enzymes and chemicals that hydrolyze proteins into peptides. 
This section summarizes potential choices and their strengths and weaknesses. 

Trypsin is the most common choice of protease for proteome hydrolysis [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21376].

> Trypsin is favorable because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and is comparatively cheaper than other enzymes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trypsin is favorable because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and low cost. 
```

Trypsin cleaves at the C-terminus of basic amino acids, arginine and lysine. 
Many of the peptides generated from trypsin are short in length (less than ~ 20 amino acids), which is ideal for chromatographic separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and identification by database search.

> But the drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410; @PMID:30687733].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410; @PMID:30687733].
```

This limits the number of identifiable protein isoforms and post translational modifications.

3. theoretical studies of proteolysis enzymes [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/960902]
4. Challenges associated with alternative enzyme choices (non-specific and semi-specific enzymes)

> 5. Alternative enzyme choices (one paragraph each?) - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Many alternative proteases are available with different specificities that complement trypsin to reveal different proteomic sequences [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005], which can help distinguish protein isoforms [@PMID:27123950].
```

The enzyme choice mostly depends on the application.
In general, for a mere protein identification mostly trypsin is the choice due to the reasons aforementioned.

> However, alternative enzymes are used for de novo assembly when the genomic data information is limited in the public database repositories.

Reviewer: are there examples of this? needs a citation

Author: Have cited few references that highlights the importance of multiple protease digestion strategies and de novo sequencing when the genome information is limited in the database repositories.
[@PMID:31615963; @PMID:30622160; @PMID:29990557; @DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106324].

Reviewer: thanks for these citations. They don't appear to have made it into the text so I'll add it as a suggestion

> Especially, they serve as an advantage in improving the sequence coverage [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005] and also helps in distinguishing protein isoforms [@PMID:27123950].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: start the paragraph with this idea

> In addition to that they also helps in improving the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification in terms of the number of petides derived [@PMID:30336047].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use of multiple proteases for proteome digestion also can improve the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification [@PMID:30336047].
```

> 6. Lys-C:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease invloved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:25823410].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease invloved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:6359954, @PMID:25823410].
```

Like trypsin, the optimum pH required for its activity is from pH 7-9. 
One among the major advantage of Lys-C is that it is resistant to denaturing agents, including 8 M urea [@PMID: 27123950].

> Compared to Arg residues, trypsin is less efficient in cleaving Lys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to Arginine, trypsin is less efficient in cleaving Lysine, which could limit the quality of quantitation from tryptic peptides.
```

> This also interfere in protein quantification in terms of sensitivity and accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in parallel to complement tryspin digestion [@PMID:23017020; @PMID:16512685]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in parallel to complement tryspin digestion [@PMID:23017020]. 
```

Reviewer: the second citation argues that a trypsin column is better than lys-C/trypsin

> 7. Glu-C:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_.

Reviewer: citation?

This specifically cleaves at the C-terimus of Glu. 

> However, depending on the pH conditions, in addition to Glu (pH 4.0) it is invloved in cleaving Asp (pH 8.0) residues also [@PMID:4627743].

Reviewer: this citation should be used for the first sentence in the paragraph, but I looked at this and although it does not two ph optima at 4 and 8 for specific activity, it doesn't say that it prefers glu versus asp at those ph values. Do you have a citation for that statement?

Author: No, i couldn't see any specific citation that highlights the pH preferential cleavage potential of Glu-C. But the variation in proteolysis when using two different buffers are included.

> 8. Asp-N:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Peptidyl-Asp metallopeptidase, commonly known as Asp-N, is a metalloprotease obtained from _Pseudomonas fragi_ [@PMID:2669754].

> It is involved in the hydrolysis of Asp residues at the N-terminal of the peptide and works at an optimum pH 4-9.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is involved in the hydrolysis of Asp residues at the N-terminal of the peptide and works at an optimum pH 4-9.  
As with any metalloprotease, chelators like EDTA should be avoided for digestion buffers when using Asp-N.
```

> Studies also suggests that Asp-N cleaves at the amino terminus of Glu when a detergent is present in the proteolysis buffer [@PMID:2669754]. 

Reviewer: double check that this the citation you wanted to use for this statement? They mention that they did use detergent but the paper doesn't examine changes in specificity with detergent, as the sentence seems to imply

Author: The authors suspected that the N-terminal glu residue might have resulted due the presence of SDS in the buffer.
In Page 1533, the very first line of the article says like this...." **Alternatively, the use of sodium dodecyl sulfate in our study may have altered the specificity, although no effect of this detergent on Endoproteinase Asp-N activity at
the concentrations used here (0.01%) has been detected"**

 The authors also stated that this might be also arising due to the difference in pH and other buffer conditions.

> However, it efficiently cleaves at the N termini of Asp than Glu yielding many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].

Reviewer: do you mean 'inefficiently'? if it is efficient why are there many missed cleavages? this citation doesn't seem to suggest that aspn is worse than other proteases, for example trypsin, does it?

Author: The Nature Protocol paper that I have cited here (PMID:27123950) clearly indicates what I have included for Asp-N. 
But, I still couldn't figure out why the authors have mentioned its efficient and results in more number of missed cleavages.

Reviewer: the sentence contradicts itself, suggesting a rewording

> 9. Alpha-lytic protease [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.m113.034710] and how it enables mapping human SUMO sites [@PMID:29079793].

Reviewer: ```suggestion

9. Alpha-lytic protease [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.m113.034710] and how it enables mapping human SUMO sites [@PMID:29079793].

```

> 10. Chymotrypsin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Chymotrypsin or Chymotrypsinogen A is a serine protease obtained from porcine or bovine pancreas and works at an optimum pH ranging from 7.8 to 8.0. 

Reviewer: general chymotrypsin citation, maybe a review or first characterization paper?

Author: cited a review on chymotrypsin

It cleaves at the C-terminus of hydrphobic amino acids Phe, Trp, Tyr and barely Met and Leu residues.
Since the transmembrane region of membrance proteins lacks tryptic cleavage sites, this enzyme works well with membrane proteins having more hydrophobic residues [@PMID: 24870543; @PMID:24696503; @PMID:27123950].
Also, the chymotryptic peptides generated after proteolysis will cover the proteome space orthogonal to that of tryptic peptides both in a quantitative and qualitative manner [@PMID:24290761; @PMID:22669647; @PMID:24696503]

> 11. Arg-C:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Clostripain, commonly known as Arg-C, is a cysteine protease obtained from _Clostridium histolyticum_.

Reviewer: citation?

Reviewer: citation didn't make it into this line

It hydrolyse mostly the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.
The peptides generated are generally longer than that of tryptic peptides.
Arg-C is often used with other proteases for improving qualitative proteome data and also for investigating PTMs [@PMID:25823410]. 

> 12. LysargiNase:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

LysargiNase, also known as Ulilysin, is a recently discovered protease belonging to the metalloprotease family. 
It is a thermophilic protease derived from _Methanosarcina acetivorans_ that specifically cleaves at the N-terminus of Lys and Arg residues [@PMID:25419962].

> Hence, it enabled in the determination of C-terminal peptides, which otherwise was not possible using trypsin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, it enabled discovery of C-terminal peptides that were not observed using trypsin.
```

> In addition, it also favours the hydr0lysis of modified amino acids such as dimethylated or methylated arginine and lysine [@PMID:25419962].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, it also can cleave modified amino acids such as methylated or dimethylated arginine and lysine [@PMID:25419962].
```

> 13. Lys-N:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Peptidyl-Lys metalloendopeptidase, or Lys-N, is an metalloprotease obtained from _Grifola frondosa_. 

Reviewer: citation?

Author: updated with a citation

Reviewer: the citation doesn't appear to have made it into this line?

Author: I have put all the citations and updated the file. Dont know how all these citations didnt appear. However, I have again added all the references. 
[@PMID:19195997]

It cleaves at N-terminal of Lys and has an optimal activity at pH 9.0.
Unlike trypsin, Lys-N is more resistant to denaturing agents and can be heated up to 70 °C.

> Reports suggests that the peptides generated after Lys-N digestion produces more of c-type ions in a ETD-based mass spectrometer. 

Reviewer: citation?

Author: have updated the citation

Reviewer: again the citation didn't make it into this line

Author: Same, I have added, but didnt appeared.
**Unlike trypsin, Lys-N is more resistant to denaturing agents and can be heated up to 70 °C [@PMID:25823410].
Reports suggests that the peptides generated after Lys-N digestion produces more of c-type ions in a ETD-based mass spectrometer [@PMID:18425140]. 
Hence this can be used for analysing PTMs, identification of C-terminal peptides and also for de novo sequencing strategies [@PMID:18425140; @PMID:20953479].**

Hence this can be used for analysing PTMs, identification of C-terminal peptides and also for de novo sequencing strategies [@PMID:18425140; @PMID:20953479].

> 14. Pepsin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Pepsin A, commonly known as pepsin, is an aspartic protease obtained from bovine or porcrine pancreas. 

Reviewer: citation for original characterization?

Author: added the citation

Reviewer: again it didn't make it into this line

Author: **Pepsin A, commonly known as pepsin, is an aspartic protease obtained from bovine or porcrine pancreas [@PMID:12089768]. 
This was the first protease that was identified and crystallized and was awarded the Nobel prize [@PMID: 19872561; @PMID:19872562; @PMID:17758437].
Pepsin works at an optimum pH from 1-4 and, in a pH depended manner it specifically cleaves Trp, Phe, Tyr and  Leu [@PMID:25823410].**

This was the first protease that was identified and crystallized and was awarded the Nobel prize.
Pepsin works at an optimum pH from 1-4 and, in a pH depended manner it specifically cleaves Trp, Phe, Tyr and  Leu [@PMID:25823410]. 
Since it possess high enzyme activity and broad specificity at lower pH, it is preferred over other proteases for MS-based disulphide mapping [@PMID:12476442; @PMID:24980484].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pepsin is also used extensively for structural mass spectrometry studies with hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) because the rate of back exchange of the amide deuteron is minimized at low pH [@DOI:10.1021/ac902477u; @DOI:10.1002/mas.21565].  
```

Use of multiple proteases for proteome digestion also can improve the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification [@PMID:30336047].

Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease invloved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:6359954, @PMID:25823410].
Like trypsin, the optimum pH required for its activity is from pH 7-9. 
One among the major advantage of Lys-C is that it is resistant to denaturing agents, including 8 M urea [@PMID: 27123950].
Compared to Arginine, trypsin is less efficient in cleaving Lysine, which could limit the quality of quantitation from tryptic peptides.
Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in parallel to complement tryspin digestion [@PMID:23017020].

Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_ [@PMID: 4627743].
This specifically cleaves at the C-terimus of Glu. 

> However, in addition to Glu (pH 4.0) it is invloved in cleaving Asp (pH 8.0) residues also [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in addition to cleaving after glutamate, Glu-C also cleaves after aspartate [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652].
```

Studies also suggests that Asp-N cleaves at the amino terminus of Glu when a detergent is present in the proteolysis buffer [@PMID:2669754]. 
However, it efficiently cleaves at the N termini of Asp than Glu yielding many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].

9. Alpha-lytic protease [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.m113.034710] and how it enables mapping human SUMO sites [@PMID:29079793].

Chymotrypsin or Chymotrypsinogen A is a serine protease obtained from porcine or bovine pancreas and works at an optimum pH ranging from 7.8 to 8.0 [@PMID:3555886]. 
It cleaves at the C-terminus of hydrphobic amino acids Phe, Trp, Tyr and barely Met and Leu residues.
Since the transmembrane region of membrance proteins lacks tryptic cleavage sites, this enzyme works well with membrane proteins having more hydrophobic residues [@PMID: 24870543; @PMID:24696503; @PMID:27123950].
Also, the chymotryptic peptides generated after proteolysis will cover the proteome space orthogonal to that of tryptic peptides both in a quantitative and qualitative manner [@PMID:24290761; @PMID:22669647; @PMID:24696503]
Clostripain, commonly known as Arg-C, is a cysteine protease obtained from _Clostridium histolyticum_.

> It hydrolyse mostly the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It hydrolyses primarily at the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.
```
